SYLLABUS FOR MATH 416, Spring 2024
(As of February 10, 2025)
Tuesday, Thursday 9:30 a.m. - 10:45 a.m.
PHY 2211
Prerequisites: MATH 240 (or equivalent), MATLAB.
Text: Instructor’s notes
Instructor: Dr. Wojciech Czaja
Oﬃce Hours: Tuesday, Thursday 11:00 - 12:00 p.m., or by appointment
Email: czaja (at) umd (dot) edu
Exams: There will be 3 midterm exams during the semester, each for the total of
100 points. The lowest score is dropped. They are tentatively scheduled on February
27, April 3, and May 1. The ﬁnal exam is worth 200 points. The ﬁnal exam is on
May 19 (Monday), 2025, at 1:30 p.m. - 3:30 p.m.
Calculators: Calculators (and other electronic devices) will NOT be allowed for the
exams, but small (5 x 3 in.) note cards will be allowed during the midterm exams.
It is the policy of the Department of Mathematics not to allow note cards on ﬁnal
exams.
Homework: On Thursday of the week that has no exam scheduled, homework will
be assigned. (Homeworks are due the next Thursday at the start of the class.) Each
one is worth 25 points, and there will 10 such assignments. The lowest 2 scores
(including absences) are dropped. Late homework will not be accepted.
Grading: The maximum point total is 600 points and the total used to calculate the
ﬁnal grade is the minimum of the two numbers: 600 points and the largest score in
the class. The setting of letter grades will be based on the number of points and will
be no worse than: 50% - D-, 60% - C-, 75% - B-, 90% - A-. Cutoﬀs for plus/minus
grades will be determined at the end of semester.
Academic integrity: The University makes me remind you about its academic
integrity policies. So I do. Nobody, however, has to remind me that part of my job
is to make sure that these policies are obeyed.
Attendance and absences: You are responsible for the material covered in class,
whether you attend or not. You are also responsible for the announcements made
during class; they may include changes in the syllabus .
The instructor will adhere strictly to the oﬃcial university policy on makeup ex-
ams. In particular, it is the policy of the University to excuse the absences of students
that result from the following causes: illness of the student, or illness of an immediate
family member; religious observance (where the nature of the observance prevents the
student from being present during the class period); participation in university ac-
tivities at the request of University authorities; and compelling circumstance beyond
12
the student’s control. Students claiming excused absence must apply in writing and
furnish documentary support for their assertion that absence resulted from one of
these causes. Moreover, foreseeable absences (such as those resulting from religious
holidays or participation in university-sponsored events) must be submitted in writ-
ing to the instructor by February 10, 2025. See the UMD’s Course Related Policy
website for more details.
Due to a University requirement for timely assessment, make ups for excused major
grading events must be scheduled within the ﬁrst 3 class days of the student returning
to campus, and at a time that is convenient for both parties.
Disabilities: If you have a disability disallowing you to test under the usual time or
in-class conditions, or if you need some other accommodations, you may contact the
oﬃce of Accessibility and Disability Service (ADS). Please let me know by February
10, 2025, if you think you may require these services. If they assess you as meriting
private conditions and/or extra time, then you may arrange to take your tests at
ADS, with extra time as they indicate. You must arrange this well in advance of a
test. Remember: I need to sign the document.
Emergency closures: In case of an emergency that closes the University for an
extended period of time (for example, due to a pandemic), be sure to access your
email for instructions from me. Should any classes or exams be cancelled, please
check the class schedule page for updated schedule information.
Course communications: Will be done via UMD email. Please make sure you
have updated yours on ELMS.
Course evaluations: Your participation in the evaluation of courses through Course-
EvalUM is important to us, and helps improve teaching and learning at the University.
CourseEvalUM will be open for you to complete your evaluations for the Fall semester.
Evaluations are anonymous and will not be available to faculty until next semester,
so they cannot possibly aﬀect your grade.
OUTLINE OF MATERIAL
This course introduces students to the mathematical concepts arising in signal
analysis from the applied harmonic analysis point of view. Topics include applied
linear algebra, Fourier series, discrete Fourier transform, Fourier transform, Shannon
Sampling Theorem, ﬁltering transforms, wavelet bases, multiresolution analysis, and
discrete wavelet transform.
Complex Numbers, Vector Spaces and Linear Transformations [1 week]
Finite frames and bases, Principal Components, Laplacian Eigenmaps [4 weeks]
Fourier Series, Discrete Fourier Transform [4 weeks]
Wavelet Bases, Discrete Wavelet Transform, [4 weeks]
Sampling, Quantization, Precision [2 weeks]